Future Phases (13+)
Cascaded Feedforward PID Control for Still01 Low Wine Condensers
1. System Architecture Overview (Cascaded + Feedforward Control)
1.1. Process Objective: Maintain the vent condenser temperature (TIT-4031) at 151–155 °F to vent off methanol while fully condensing ethanol. This is achieved by regulating cooling water flow through a 90° V-ball valve (FCV-4032). The control strategy combines a cascade loop (two nested FBD - PIDE controllers) with a feedforward element for disturbance anticipation.
1.2. Cascade Loop Structure: The system uses two PIDE controllers in cascade: an outer (primary) loop and an inner (secondary) loop​ [ literature.rockwellautomation.com ]. The outer loop monitors the vent temperature (TIT-4031) and adjusts the setpoint of the inner loop. The inner loop directly controls the cooling water valve to regulate the product condenser temperature (TIT-4033). This architecture leverages the faster response of the product temperature compared to the vent temperature (TIT-4033 has a shorter dead time, than TIT-4031 – MUST be confirmed with testing and data collection described below in Section 5.1) to correct disturbances before the vent temperature deviates significantly​ – Forum discussion about cascaded loop tuning. In summary:
Outer Loop (Primary): PV = Vent temperature (TIT-4031); SP = 153 °F (desired vent temp); CV = setpoint for inner loop (desired product condenser temp).
Inner Loop (Secondary): PV = Product condenser temperature (TIT-4033); SP = received from outer loop (cascade SP); CV = Cooling water valve command to FCV-4032.
The outer loop’s output drives the inner loop’s setpoint, forming the cascaded (master-slave) relationship. The inner loop reacts quickly to achieve the product temperature setpoint, which in turn keeps the vent temperature in range. This ensures any disturbance (e.g. sudden vapor influx) is corrected at the product condenser before the slower vent temperature is affected​.
Feedforward Integration: In addition to feedback control, a feedforward path uses still vapor pressure (PIT-4012), Cooling water Temp (TIT-52001), and Cooling Water pressure (PIT-52006) as measured disturbance variables (DV). Still vapor pressure indicates the rate of vapor (and heat) entering the condensers; as it rises, cooling demand increases. We implement a graduated feedforward bias formula to assist with increasing or decreasing CV output based on DV values.  For example, Still01 vapor pressure in the range 0 psi to 2.0, will provide a FF bias in the range of 0 – 0.15.  Then the scaled bias is added to the valve CV to proactively increase cooling water flow. This feedforward action “anticipates” pressure-driven load changes and adjusts the cooling valve output before vent temperature can drift​​, here is a quick review of feedforward control in PID/PIDE control loops, if needed.  The bias will be calibrated so that at 1 psi there is essentially 0% extra valve opening, and at 2 psi a predetermined additional opening (based on tests) is applied. The feedforward signal thus nudges the valve open proportionally to pressure increases, reducing the corrective work the PID loops must do.
Supporting Measurements: Other PVs that influence performance but are not directly controlled include:
TIT-4021 – Condensed distillate temperature after the low wine condenser (LWC). This indicates product outflow temperature (useful for quality monitoring and ensuring it’s not over-cooled).
PIT-52006 – Cooling tower water supply pressure (nominal 40–50 psi). Affects available flow for a given valve position.
TIT-52001 – Cooling tower water supply temperature (varies seasonally). Affects cooling efficiency (cooler water = more heat removal).
These supporting variables can be used to refine the control logic (see Section 5) but are not part of the primary cascade control. In summary, Figure 1 below outlines the control architecture:
Outer PID (Vent Temp Control): Monitors vent temp; computes desired product temp SP.
Inner PID (Product Temp Control): Receives SP from outer; modulates valve to control product temp.
Feedforward Bias: Adds directly to valve command based on vapor pressure (and trimmed by tower water conditions).
Cooling Water Valve (FCV-4032): Final control element adjusting cooling flow.
Process Dynamics: Cooling water -> LWC (affects TIT-4033) -> LWVC (affects TIT-4031); disturbances from vapor pressure and cooling water conditions enter at various points.
(In the above, LWC = low wine condenser (primary condenser), LWVC = low wine vent condenser.)
2. PIDE Loop Configuration (Cascade and Feedforward Implementation)
In Studio 5000 (v35+), the cascaded PID control is implemented using two PIDE function blocks configured as a cascade pair, with added feedforward. Key configuration steps for each loop are:
Secondary PIDE (Inner, Product Temp Loop):
PV input = TIT_4033 (product condenser temperature).
SP source = Cascade input from primary loop. Enable Cascade mode on this PIDE by setting its AllowCasRat parameter = TRUE​. This exposes an SPCascade input pin. The inner loop will use SPCascade as its active setpoint whenever Cascade mode is active​.
CV output = Cooling water valve command for FCV_4032. Configure CV scale in engineering units corresponding to valve travel (0–100% or in % open). For example, CV=0% fully closed, 100% fully open. Set CV limits accordingly (e.g. CVHLimit = 100%, CVLLimit = 0%). This PIDE drives the analog output to the valve.
Mode: This loop will typically run in Auto (closed-loop) at all times during normal operation (except when tuning or in manual mode for troubleshooting). When in Cascade mode, its SP is not operator-entered but received from the primary loop.
Primary PIDE (Outer, Vent Temp Loop):
PV input = TIT_4031 (vent condenser temperature).
SP = 153°F (midpoint of desired 151–155 °F range; operators can adjust slightly within this band).
CV output = Product temperature setpoint for the inner loop. Essentially, the primary PIDE’s output represents the target product condenser temperature (the value fed into the inner loop’s SP). Engineering Units Alignment: Configure the primary PIDE CV in degrees Fahrenheit to match the inner loop SP engineering units​. For example, we expect the product temperature range to be 90 - 160 °F, set the primary CV scale to cover at least this range (e.g. CVEU Min = 85 °F, CVEU Max = 165 °F) so the output can span the necessary temperature range.
Cascade output linking: Wire the primary PIDE’s output to the secondary PIDE’s SPCascade input. In a Function Block Diagram, you can draw a connector from primary.CV to secondary.SPCascade. In Ladder Logic, you can accomplish the same by moving the primary CV value into the secondary PIDE’s .SPCascade tag each program scan (or better, use a CPT/AOI if available for clarity). When the secondary PIDE is in Cascade mode, it will track this value as its setpoint​.
Mode: The primary PIDE runs in Cascade (CAS) mode. Set AllowCasRat = TRUE so that the primary loop can be placed in Cascade mode (as a master)​. In Cascade mode, the primary’s SP is operator-entered (153 °F) and it automatically uses its CV as the secondary’s SP. The primary PIDE should be in Auto (or CAS) during normal operation; if the secondary loop goes out of cascade or to manual, the primary will detect that and pause (explained below).
Feedforward (Bias) Integration: Both PIDE blocks support a bias/feedforward input that adds directly to the computed output​. We will utilize the bias input on the inner (secondary) PIDE to inject the feedforward signal, since feedforward is ultimately an adjustment to the cooling valve position. In Studio 5000, expose the .BIAS (or FeedForward) pin on the inner PIDE block. Wire a calculated bias value derived from PIT_4012 (vapor pressure) into this pin. This bias will add (or subtract) from the inner PIDE’s output, moving the valve preemptively for pressure changes​. For our case, create a scaling function block (e.g. SCL) or simple logic: when PIT-4012 = 1 psi, bias = 0%; when = 2 psi, bias = X% (to be determined from testing, see Section 6). Values in between scale linearly. For example, if testing shows that at 2 psi the valve needs ~15% more open to hold vent temp, then bias = 15% at 2 psi. The bias value is added to the inner PID’s own output command, immediately increasing cooling flow on a pressure rise​. Note: Use engineering units consistent with the inner loop CV — if CV is % valve, bias should be in %; if CV were in different units (e.g. gallons/min), bias must be in those units​. Also limit the bias value to avoid over-driving the valve (e.g. cap bias at maybe +20% max) and consider smoothing the pressure signal (a first-order filter or moving average) to avoid noise-induced swings.
Anti-Windup and Tracking: Cascade control requires careful handling of the primary loop when the secondary is saturated or not in cascade. The Rockwell PIDE offers built-in features to handle this​. Configure the following on the PIDE blocks:
On the primary PIDE, enable CV tracking/initialization. Expose the CVInitReq and CVInitValue pins or corresponding parameters. Set CVInitReq to true whenever the secondary loop is not in cascade (e.g. secondary in manual). Also, map CVInitValue to the current secondary SP or a safe value. This ensures the primary PIDE output is initialized to match the secondary’s actual working SP if the cascade link is broken, preventing a sudden bump when cascade is resumed​. The PIDE can do this automatically if configured in Cascade mode: when the secondary goes to manual, the primary freezes and holds its last output equal to the secondary’s setpoint​.
Enable anti-windup on the primary PIDE. Expose the WindupHOut/WindupLOut pins. Tie these to the secondary loop’s output limits or mode. For example, if the secondary loop’s CV saturates at 0% or 100%, send a signal to the primary to inhibit integral action in that direction. The PIDE supports automatically stopping integration when the secondary reaches its limit​. This prevents the primary integrator from “wind-ing up” trying to drive the secondary beyond its capacity​. In practice, when secondary CV = CVHighLimit (valve fully open but vent still above SP), the primary should hold its output (and error integral) instead of continuing to ramp down the SP endlessly. Rockwell’s PIDE Cascade mode manages this by locking the primary’s output when it detects secondary saturation​ (you can also implement by external logic if needed, but built-in is preferable).
The secondary PIDE (inner loop) should use external reset feedback if available. In function block, connect the inner PIDE’s BKCAL_OUT to the outer PIDE’s BKCAL_IN to ensure smooth coordination (this is typically auto wired if you place a CASCADE block). This external reset (also called dynamic reset limit) ensures the primary loop doesn’t outrun the secondary​​, as outlined here. Essentially, the secondary’s PV or output is fed back to primary’s integrator as a feedback, preventing primary from changing faster than secondary can respond. This is the best practice for cascade loops to avoid oscillations due to one loop racing ahead of the other​. In Ladder logic, achieving this might require a custom rung to copy the inner CV to the outer PIDE’s .ExternalReset or .BKCAL if the instruction supports it (that is one of the many reason we do not use PID ladder instructions to implement complex control loop structures. Highlighted below: 
Ladder Logic vs. Function Block Implementation: You can implement the above either in Ladder Logic (using PID instructions and move blocks) or in a Function Block Diagram (FBD) routine:
Ladder: Use two PID instructions (one for vent, one for product). Both should be executed in a Periodic Task (see Section 3). In ladder, the PID block appears as an output instruction on a rung. For each PID, configure its tags for PV, SP, etc. On each scan of the periodic task, do something like:
Go ,CopyEdit, PID (InnerLoop_PID.PV:=TIT_4033, .SP:=InnerLoop_SP, Bias:=Pressure_Bias, ... );  PID    (OuterLoop_PID, .PV:=TIT_4031, .SP:=<user-defined SP>, ... );  MOV     OuterLoop_PIDE.CV  ->  InnerLoop_SP;   // cascade SP update 
Also include logic to handle modes: e.g., if an operator switches the loop to manual, set PIDE .ProgManReq, etc., and freeze the cascade link. Ladder requires carefully managing execution order: ensure the Outer PIDE executes before the MOV to update the inner SP, and the Inner PIDE executes after the SP is updated, all within the same scan of the periodic task. Which is  why we DO NOT wan t to use it if we want to maximize control and reduce overall program complexity.
Function Block: FBD is often more intuitive for cascade control. In an FBD routine, place two PIDE function blocks. Set the inner PIDE’s mode to Cascade (AllowCasRat = true) and wire the outer PIDE’s CV output to the inner PIDE’s SP input pin (SPCascade). Wire the feedforward bias into the inner PIDE’s Bias pin. Connect the inner PIDE’s output to an Analog Output block (AO) representing FCV-4032 (and connect AO’s BKCAL back to PIDE for proper handshaking). The outer PIDE’s output does not go to an AO, but to the inner SP, so its BKCAL should come from the inner PIDE (allowing the outer to know the secondary status). This visual wiring enforces correct execution order automatically. Tip: Use clear labeling (e.g., “VentTemp_CTL” and “ProdTemp_CTL” PIDE blocks) and comment the logic for clarity.
Task Scheduling and Execution Timing:  To ensure stable and predictable PID performance, run the PIDE loops in a periodic task with an appropriate update rate. Do not use continuous tasks for PIDE, as their scan time can jitter and destabilize tuning. Recommended configuration:
Inner Loop (Product Temp) Task: Set as Periodic task with an update time of 250 -500ms, 400ms to start.  This ensures execution at a relatively fast interval to capture the smaller time constant of the product temperature. This is short enough to be <5–10% of the product temperature’s expected time constant (and much smaller than its dead time), which is a common guideline for PID / PIDE sample time(s). A faster period (e.g. 100 ms) is usually unnecessary for a thermal process and only increases CPU load; 0.5 s gives ample responsiveness for a loop that likely has a process lag of many seconds.
Outer Loop (Vent Temp) Task: Set as a second d periodic task with an update time between 1s – 2.5s, 1.8s to start (4 – 5x the time of the inner loop).  This loop should execute at a slower rate since the vent temperature changes more slowly. The outer loop does not need to update as frequently as the inner loop – in fact, updating the outer loop too fast WILL introduce noise into the setpoint sent to the inner loop. This will ensure the outer loop task is scheduled after the inner loop task or on a separate rate such that inner loop updates at least a few times per outer loop update. For example, if inner = 0.4 s and outer = 1.8 s, the inner executes 4.5 times for one outer execution. This aligns with the guideline that the inner loop be roughly 4–5 times faster than the outer loop​. If using a single task for both, you can still achieve this by tuning (outer PIDE’s integral action slower), but separate tasks with different periods makes it explicit and much easier to adjust.
Task Priorities: range 1 – 15 - With 1 being highest and 15 lowest priority. The inner loop’s task should have equal or higher priority than the outer loop’s task if they are separate, to ensure the inner loop can respond promptly. However, avoid priority inversion issues (don’t starve other tasks; L83 has plenty of horsepower though). Task priorities range from Common practice: assign inner loop task a medium-high priority 5 -7 and outer loop task slightly lower 8 – 10.  
PIDE Timing Configuration: In Logix PIDE, ensure the timing mode is set to Periodic with the correct loop update time. In the PIDE block configuration, set the Execution mode to “Periodic” (or Timing Mode = Periodic) and specify the exact execution period if needed. For example, set Loop Update Time = 0.5 seconds for inner loop, and 2.0 seconds for outer (if they are in separate tasks). If the Periodic taks time is changed – the PIDE.Update time MUST also be changed.  Consistency is key: the PIDE’s internal integral and derivative calculations use this value, so it must match the actual task execution period​. (If using Ladder, the PID can detect the task period automatically when in periodic tasks; if using FBD, PIDE it’s typically configured in the block properties.)
I/O Considerations: Configure the analog input modules for the temperature transmitters (TIT-4031, 4033) to update faster than the task period (e.g. 100 ms RPI) so that each PID execution has fresh data. The analog output for the valve should also be updated at least as fast as the inner loop task. If using real-time sampling (IRT or oversample features of L83 and 1756 modules), you could tie the PIDE to the module’s timestamp to avoid jitter, but this is optional​. For most cases, a straightforward periodic task is sufficient.
Buffering and Phase: Only necessary if you have no choice but to use a single periodic task for both PIDE instructions. If the two loops are in the same periodic task, note the execution order: Outer PIDE should execute first, update the inner SP, then inner PIDE executes. In an FBD, left-to-right data flow ensures this. In Ladder, separate rungs in correct sequence (or use the JSR routine scan order accordingly). This prevents using a stale SP. If they are in separate tasks, the coordination is a bit looser: outer runs on its schedule, inner on its own. Minor misalignment (e.g. inner running half a second before outer updates SP) is not critical as long as rates are consistent, but to be precise, you can schedule the outer task to trigger immediately after an inner task instance. For example, if inner is 0.5 s and outer 2 s, set outer task phase so that it runs right after an inner loop execution every 4th inner tick.
Monitor Task Load: With an L83 CPU, 0.5s and 1-2s tasks are very light. Still, verify that CPU utilization is acceptable and task overlap (if any) is handled. The goal is deterministic execution to respect the tuning assumptions.
PIDE Parameter Setup and Loop Tuning Strategy
Proper configuration of the PIDE parameters is essential for stable control. Below is a summary of key PIDE settings for each controller, along with initial tuning considerations:
Primary PIDE (Vent Temperature Control):
PV Source: TIT-4031 (Vent temp). Scaled in °F.
SP: 153 °F (setpoint can be adjustable, but operators should keep within 151–155 range).
CV Output: Scaled in °F as discussed (this is the product temp SP). CV limits: set to a reasonable range to prevent extreme demands. For instance, min CV = 100 °F (we wouldn’t try to set product condenser below 100 °F as that might over-condense methanol), max CV = 170 °F (we wouldn’t let product get too hot either). These limits act as safety bounds for the cascade. Make sure the CVEU Min/Max in PIDE properties match these engineering limits​.
Gain, Reset, Derivative: Initially, keep the outer loop conservative. 
Proportional Gain (Kc): start low – this is a ratio of ΔCV% / Δ°F (e.g. 0.5 would indicate a 1% change in CV would result in a 2 °F, eventually. But this is Kc for Outer loop gain.  The outer loop is unitless since PV and CV both °F, its output feeds a SP in °F to the inner loop. Example: 1.0 means a 1°F vent error will change the product temp inner loop SP by 1°F (while the overall relationship between product and vent temp is directly proportional it is not a 1 to 1 relationship.  The tuning process must be used to get “a feel” for this relationship mathematically. 
Integral (Ti): start relatively large (slow) to avoid overcorrection – e.g. Ti = 5 minutes (300 s) or more. This means the outer loop will correct slowly, letting the inner loop handle fast disturbances. The outer loop mainly corrects any steady-state error in vent temperature.
Derivative (Td): often not needed on outer temperature loops (derivative on a slow temperature can amplify noise), so set Td = 0 initially. We will refine these after the initial tests (Section 6). The tuning goal for the outer loop is to have it 4-5× slower than inner response​; in practice, this means a small gain and long integral time.
PIDE Mode Settings: AllowCasRat = TRUE (to allow Cascade mode). Set the PIDE’s .Mode to Cascade in run (this can be done by an .OperatorCmd or programmatic request depending on how PIDE AOI is used). Ensure External Reset is enabled if available (in PIDE advanced tab, there’s a setting for external reset feedback – tie it to secondary PV or BKCAL as described in Section 2).
Deadband: need determined during tuning – since vent temp needs tight control (±1 °F), you might set a narrow control deadband if oscillation becomes an issue. For now, keep deadband 0 or very small (<<1°F) to maintain precision.
Feedforward/Bias: The primary loop itself might not need a bias, since we inject feedforward at the secondary. However, one could optionally include a small bias to primary SP if there were known offsets (not in this case). Keep primary BIAS = 0.
Secondary PIDE (Product Temperature Control):
PV Source: TIT-4033 (condenser outlet Product temp). Scaled °F.
SP: Received from outer loop (cascade). The .SPCascade connection provides this. (If the inner loop is ever switched to local mode, it would use a manual SP; normally it stays in cascade).
CV Output: Goes to FCV-4032 (cooling water valve). Typically scale this 0–100% corresponds to 0–100% valve command (or in engineering units of the output module, e.g. 0–16383 for 4-20 mA, but using PIDE’s EU for % is easiest and then scale in the AO block). Set CV limits if not already done in AO: 0% min (closed) and say 100% max (fully open). If you know the valve should never be fully closed during operation (to maintain some cooling flow), you might set a slightly higher min like 5%, but that can also be handled outside PID by a clamp.
Gain, Reset, Derivative: The inner loop should be tuned for fast, stable control of product temperature. Start with moderate aggressiveness:
Proportional Gain: Choose an initial gain based on process gain. If unknown, start with a small value like 1.0 (which means 1°F error -> 1% valve change, assuming CV in % and PV in °F). We will refine using empirical tuning (Section 6). The inner loop can typically tolerate a higher gain than the outer because of shorter dead time.
Integral (Reset Time): Start with a medium value, e.g. Ti = 60 s (1 minute) or 120 s. This will eliminate any offset reasonably fast but not so fast as to cause instability. We expect the product temp loop has a time constant on the order of multiple seconds, so an integral around that range is a good initial guess.
Derivative: Often not needed for most temperature loops due to measurement noise and slow dynamics. We can leave Td = 0 initially. If the product temp shows lag-dominant behavior with negligible noise, adding a small derivative might help phase lead, but this is advanced tuning to consider later.
Filter: The PIDE block allows PV filtering. If TIT-4033 signal is noisy (check the transmitter, but usually temperature signals are pretty smooth), you might apply a small filter (e.g. PV Filter time = 1–5 s) to dampen noise. Excessive filtering adds delay – avoid if not necessary. The same goes for the vent PV if needed.
Feedforward/Bias: Bias input: Wire the feedforward signal here (as described above). The inner PIDE will then do: Output = PID(Output) + Bias. We anticipate this bias to handle the bulk of fast changes due to pressure spikes, so the PID output will mainly trim around it. Ensure the PIDE’s configuration is set to allow external bias addition (in the PIDE block, the bias pin should be active, and check that Feedforward gain is effectively 1 if there’s a gain parameter). There may be a parameter FFGain or similar – if so, set it to 1.0 so that the bias is fully applied (or simply design the bias value as final percent).
Mode: Inner loop is normally in Cascade (slave) Auto mode (i.e., it receives SP from outer and controls CV). If operators need to directly control cooling valve, they can switch inner loop to Manual (which will open/close valve manually) – in such case, the outer loop should automatically freeze (since cascade is broken, see anti-windup above). Provide HMI indications for cascade status (e.g. a light showing “Cascade Active” when inner is in CAS mode).
Integration of Tower Water Variations: While not standard PIDE parameters, it’s worth configuring logic around the PIDE to account for the cooling water supply conditions:
The effect of tower water pressure (PIT-52006) can be compensated by adjusting the valve command or bias. You might include a linear correction: for example, define nominal supply pressure = 42.5 psi. Compute a pressure factor = (42.5 / PIT-52006). If the pressure drops to 40 psi, factor = 42.5/40 = 1.0625. Use this factor to slightly increase the output command (or decrease if pressure is higher). One implementation: multiply the feedforward bias by this factor so that when pressure is low, the bias opens the valve more. Alternatively, add an additional small bias: pit52006_bias = 0.25 – ((<pit52006.value> - 25) / 70) where 70 is a tuning constant (e.g. 1% valve change per 1 psi drop). Be cautious to limit this effect and filter the pressure reading if it fluctuates (pump ripple, etc.). The goal is to mitigate reduced flow from low supply pressure by opening the valve further preemptively. The formula above provides a FF bias multiple range from 0.25 - -0.25, the lower the pressure the more help CV will need to reach SP (see section 6.3.2.3).
The effect of tower water temperature (TIT-52001) is that warmer cooling water reduces the condenser’s effectiveness, requiring more flow (or a lower product temperature SP) to achieve the same vent temperature. You can compensate similarly: define a nominal tower water temp (say 67.5 °F). Compute a temperature factor or delta: ΔT_water = TIT_520001 – 67.5. If water is 85 °F (17.5° higher), you might reduce the effective cooling by some amount (see section 6.3.2.2). A simple approach: add a bias as follows: tit52001_bias = <Konstant>* (<TIT_52001.value> - 75 °F) to the valve CV. For example, <Konstant> might be 0.0086 per °F. Then 17.5 °F warmer water adds a (0.0086 17.5) +1 = 1.15x weighted bias to CV output of inner loop. Conversely, if water is colder than 67.5, this term would be negative (less valve needed). Incorporate this into the feedforward bias sum as well.
These two compensation biases (for pressure and temperature) can be combined with the vapor pressure bias: e.g. Total_Bias = Bias_from_PIT4012 + Pressure_Corr + Temp_Corr + 1. This total bias is then fed to the PIDE. Ensure that Total_Bias is limited to avoid extreme values (the sum could potentially ask for more than the valve can do). As it is currently defined our max FF bias is .15 + .15 + .25 + 1 = 1.55; therefore if all tertiary PVs are max adverse range we will increase the PIDE output to the CV by 55%.   This approach integrates the known first principles influences: low pressure or high cooling water temperature both reduce cooling capacity, which we counter by proactively opening the valve a bit more​.
It’s important to test and tune these compensations. Start with small Kp_press and Kt_temp values (so as not to overcompensate) and adjust based on performance observations (e.g., if a hot day causes vent temp to creep up despite feedforward, you might increase Kt_temp)
Monitoring Only Alternative: If direct integration of these is deemed too complex initially, at least set up these PVs on the HMI for operators to monitor. They can then manually adjust the vent SP or bias if they know the tower water is unusually hot/cold or pressure is low. However, the automated approach above is preferred for consistency.
Empirical Tuning and Dynamic Characterization Worksheet:  To achieve optimal control, perform empirical tests on the actual system to identify its dynamic parameters (dead times, time constants, gains). Use these findings to tune the PID settings and calibrate the feedforward. Below is a step-by-step method and a worksheet for data collection:
Data Collection Plan: We will do three types of tests: All these can be performed in current system by putting loops in manual.  ***Beer Feed PID MUST be rock solid before this testing begins – this worksheet can be used to get the Beer feed tuned as well. Baseline data collection workbook: Loop data collection table.xlsx
Once base data is established with existing control mechanisms and we have good starting points for the advanced control system, we can use those values as a starting point.  Here is the advanced tuning process once Cascaded FF loop is instantiated:
Inner Loop Open-Loop Step Test: With the inner loop in manual (outer loop also in manual or cascade off), introduce a step change to the cooling water valve position and record the response of the product temperature (TIT-4033). This will reveal the inner loop process gain, dead time, and time constant.
Outer Loop (Cascade) Response Test: With the inner loop in automatic and controlling, put the outer loop in manual (so it’s not correcting) and step the inner loop’s setpoint (product temperature SP) by a small amount. Record the response of the vent temperature (TIT-4031). This simulates how the vent temp responds to a change in product temp, characterizing the outer loop dynamics.
Disturbance (Feedforward) Test: Induce a change in vapor pressure (PIT-4012) – for instance, increase steam input and beer feed to raise still vapor pressure above 1 psi – while keeping the control loops in manual or at least preventing outer loop from counteracting (to observe natural effect). Record how much and how quickly vent and product temperatures change due to the pressure increase. This will guide setting the feedforward gain.
Ensure the still is at steady state at normal operating conditions (<0.5 psi vapor pressure, LWVC vent temp ~152°F, product temperature whatever it normally is at that condition) before starting each test. Only make one change at a time and allow the system to settle.
Worksheet for Dynamic Data: Use a table like the following to log the results:
(Note: Fill in “(sec)” and “(°F)” with measured numbers after testing.)
Inner Loop Results: From the inner loop test, determine approximate dead time (Td) – the delay until TIT-4033 first starts responding after the valve change. Also estimate the time constant – time to reach ~63% of the total temperature change. The process gain is the total change in temperature divided by the change in valve percent (e.g., if opening valve 10% lowers product temp by 8°F, gain = –0.8 °F/%). Use these to tune the inner PID: for instance, a common tuning rule for PI is Kc ≈ (1/ProcessGain) * (T<sub>d</sub>/τ) for aggressive tuning or smaller for conservative, and Ti ≈ τ (or slightly above) for a starting point. Ensure the inner loop’s natural period is much faster than vent’s – if not, you may need to increase inner P gain or reduce τ via faster PID action​.
Outer Loop Results: From the outer loop (cascade) test, identify Td and τ for vent temperature responding to a change in product SP. Likely the vent has a slightly larger dead time (perhaps 1.25× inner, per design) and a larger time constant. The process gain here would be in °F vent change per °F change in product SP. For example, if raising product SP by 5°F raises vent by 3°F at steady state, the gain = 0.6. Use these in tuning the outer PID: Outer Kc can be roughly (1/ProcessGain)*(some fraction like Td/τ if using IMC tuning). Given cascade, you want outer loop gain lower; a rough initial guess: Kc_outer ~ half of that of inner (if both PVs same units) or use a formal method like Cohen-Coon or Lambda with desired closed-loop time ~ equal to vent’s time constant or a bit larger. Ti_outer can be set to vent’s time constant or even 2× that, to be slower than inner. These ensure a sluggish but stable outer loop that gives the inner loop time to work.
Feedforward (Pressure) Results: Note how much vent temp deviated for a given pressure rise without control. Also note how much the valve ultimately had to open to compensate (if you later re-enabled control to recover). For instance, if a +0.5 psi in pressure caused +6°F in vent (from 152 to 158) when valve was fixed, and to bring it back to 152 the valve needed an extra 15% open, then we can calibrate feedforward: For 0.5 psi increase, need +15% valve -> 30%/psi feedforward gain. Apply maybe 80–100% of this theoretically (to avoid overkill) as the feedforward factor. So in this example, we’d set bias = 30%*(PIT4012 – 1.0) psi. That means at 1.5 psi, bias ~15%; at 2.0 psi, bias ~30%. This would hopefully prevent that 6°F rise entirely. We will validate this during commissioning. Adjust the feedforward factor based on observed error when pressure changes: ideally, a pressure change causes minimal vent SP deviation if feedforward is correct. If vent still spikes up, increase bias factor; if vent dips (overcompensated), decrease it​.
Tower Water Influence: If possible, also observe if a significant change in cooling water temperature or pressure occurs (perhaps turning on another user of the cooling water to drop pressure slightly). This can be hard to test on demand, but seasonally you will notice trends. You can fine-tune the Kp_press and Kt_temp from Section 4 by observing vent control error under differing tower conditions. For instance, in summer, if vent tends to run 2°F high consistently, that suggests the compensation might need to be increased. These adjustments are usually done over longer-term observation rather than a quick step test.
Tuning Adjustments: With the measured parameters:
Start by implementing the initial PID gains as calculated/estimated. Use the inner loop test data to set the inner PIDE gains first. Then, with inner in Auto, use outer loop data to set outer PIDE gains.
Use a conservative approach initially: it’s safer for the loops to be a bit slow than too oscillatory. You can always increase gain later. Watch the response to setpoint changes: the inner loop should settle quickly (e.g. within perhaps 1–2 minutes for a step), and the outer loop should settle over a longer period (maybe 3–5 minutes for a small vent change) without oscillation.
If oscillations occur: check if the inner loop is oscillating on its own (if so, reduce inner P or increase I). If the outer loop is causing oscillation (vent swings), it may be too aggressive or interacting badly with feedforward. Try reducing outer Kc or lengthening Ti. Also ensure external reset is working (if not, the outer could be integrating faster than inner responds).
Integral Windup: Verify that when the valve hits limits (e.g., fully open on a big disturbance), the outer loop’s integrator stops increasing. You can monitor the primary PIDE’s integral term or windup flag. PIDE’s built-in windup limiting should prevent it​, but ensure it’s functioning by perhaps creating a scenario where the valve saturates (e.g., command an extremely low vent SP that inner loop cannot achieve fully). The outer loop output should pause and not ramp endlessly. Adjust WindupHOut logic if needed.
Feedforward Tuning: After deploying, intentionally create a gentle disturbance (if safe) like a small pressure bump or a controlled change in reboiler steam. Observe the vent temperature response. Ideally, the feedforward will handle most of it and the vent temp barely moves, with the outer PID only making minor corrections (you can watch the outer PID output – it should not spike too large). If vent temp still jumps outside 151–153 briefly, increase the feedforward gain (and vice versa if vent dips below 151, meaning overfeed of cooling). The goal is that feedforward handles ~80% of the correction, and PID just trims the remaining 20%​.
Document the final tuned PID constants in a table for future reference (e.g., Kc, Ti, Td for both loops, and feedforward bias formula, plus any tower water bias values). This will help in future retuning or troubleshooting.
Deployment and Commissioning Steps
Finally, to implement and validate the control strategy in the live system, follow a structured approach to minimize risk:
Preparation:
Review Control Narrative: Ensure all engineers/operators understand the control strategy (cascade with feedforward) and the purpose of maintaining 152°F vent temp (safety and product quality). Verify that instruments (TIT-4031, TIT-4033, PIT-4012, PIT-52006, TIT-52001,etc.) are calibrated and reading accurately. Any existing control loops for this system should be identified and safely transitioned (if an older control scheme exists, plan its removal or manual mode).
Set Initial Parameters: Load the initial PID tuning constants (from Section 5 or conservative guesses) and feedforward scaling constants. Also input any limits (CV limits, etc.) and ensure mode is set (inner PIDE in Cascade-Remote SP, outer in Cascade-Primary Auto). It can be useful to start with the outer loop in Manual mode and inner in Manual at first deployment – this prevents any automatic action when the system goes live until you are ready.
Initial Startup (Manual to Auto Transition):
Start with both loops in Manual. Manually position the cooling water valve (FCV-4032) at a setting that you believe will maintain near 152°F vent. For example, if historically a certain valve % was used, set that. Or start around mid-range (e.g. 50% open) if unsure, with the still01 steam input at a low safe rate.
Bring the still up to operating conditions gradually. As the vapor starts flowing, monitor TIT-4031 and TIT-4033 manually. Adjust the valve manually to keep TIT-4031 in the target band. This ensures the process is stable before enabling automatic control.
Once the system is at normal operation (vapor pressure <0.5 psi, vent ~153°F manually held, product temp stable), first activate the inner loop: switch the inner PIDE to Auto (Cascade) mode, but still keep the outer loop in Manual. When switching the inner loop to Auto, give it a setpoint equal to the current product temperature (this prevents any immediate bump). In cascade mode, that means ensure the outer loop’s CV (which feeds SP) is initialized to current PV. If using PIDE’s built-in init, it will do this if outer was in hold​. Alternatively, you can temporarily take inner out of cascade and set its SP = current PV, then put it in auto. The inner loop should take over valve control but initially do nothing (since error ~0).
Observe the inner loop controlling on its own. You can do a small manual SP change to test its response (e.g., raise inner SP by 2°F and see if valve opens further and product temp follows). This tests the tuning of the inner loop. The vent loop is still manual, so vent temp will drift if you do this – so limit testing. Return inner SP to normal. The inner PID should hold product temperature steady now and respond to any minor disturbances quickly.
Enable Cascade Control:
Now that the inner loop is stable in auto, activate the outer loop. Set the outer loop’s mode to Auto (Cascade primary). Before you do, ensure the outer loop’s setpoint is at 152°F (or your target within the range) and its output is currently matching the inner loop’s SP (which it should if we initialized correctly). If the PIDE handled CVInit properly, the outer PIDE CV = current inner SP already​. If not, you can perform a bumpless transfer manually: in outer manual mode, adjust the outer output until TIT-4033 (inner PV) equals that output (i.e., match inner SP). Essentially, outer output = current product temp. Then switch outer to Auto/Cascade – the error at that moment is zero so it won’t bump.
Once in cascade, the outer loop will begin to trim the inner loop’s SP to hold vent at 153°F. Closely monitor the first 5–10 minutes of operation:
Vent temperature (TIT-4031): Should remain near setpoint. Some initial oscillation of a small amplitude (±1-2°F) may occur as the outer loop “settles” – that’s okay as long as it damps out. If vent temp starts drifting rapidly or oscillations grow, be prepared to switch outer loop back to Manual and investigate tuning.
Product temperature (TIT-4033): Will now be adjusting as commanded by outer loop. Ensure it stays in a reasonable range (not hitting the CV limits you set too often). If the outer loop demands a product SP outside the allowed range (e.g., tries to set 80°F or 170°F), something may be off in tuning or feedforward.
Valve Output (FCV-4032 %): Watch for any saturation (0% or 100%). If the valve goes fully open or closed and vent is still not in control, you may need to intervene (for example, if fully open and vent high, your cooling capacity is insufficient or feedforward is under-calibrated; if fully closed and vent low, perhaps too much cooling or feedforward overshoot).
Feedforward Action: The total bias associated with feedforward is dependent on 3 process variables.  Each variable will add or subtract from the total_bias based on current value.  Here are the initial bias formulas for each PV.  Total_bias =  ({if PIT4012.biasvalue = <pit4012.value * 0.075 + if tit52001 > 0 <tit52001.value> / <base nominal.value (72)> - 1; else 0} +  {<base nominal.value (45)>  / <pit52006.value> - 1}) +1 = PIDE.BIAS.  
PIT4012 FF multiplier range: 0 - .15; Pressure range 0 – 2 psi – FORMULA for bias calc: pit4012_bias = 0.075 * pit4012.value
TIT52001 FF multiplier range: -0.15 to 0.15; Temperature Range: 50 – 85 °F – FORMULA for bias calc:  tit52001_bias = 0.0086 * (<tit52001.value> - 67.5).
PIT42006 FF multiplier range: 0.25 to -0.25; Pressure Range: 25 – 60 PSI – FORMULA for bias calc: pit52006_bias = 0.25 – ((<pit52006.value> - 25) / 70)  
Introduce a small step in cooling water pressure if possible and watch how the valve responds immediately. You should see the valve move as soon as pressure rises, even before vent temp changes much. This indicates the feedforward bias is working. The vent temp might show only a minor blip. If instead vent temp starts climbing quickly before valve reacts significantly, the feedforward may not be strong enough or not functioning – check the bias wiring and calibration.
If any instability is observed, put the outer loop in manual (leaving inner in auto so at least product temp is controlled) to regain steady state. Adjust tuning parameters as needed (one at a time, in small increments – e.g., halve or double the outer loop gain, etc., based on the trend seen). Then re-engage cascade.
Validation and Optimization:
Once the cascade loop is stable, conduct tests of disturbance rejection: for example, have operations slightly reduce speed of Cooling water supply to reduce cooling water pressure, as measured by PIT-52006.  Observe that PIT-52006 remains within normal operating range and TIT-4031 remains in 151 – 155°F range throughout. Ideally, the outer loop will adjust inner SP and valve accordingly to achieve this. If vent temp overshoots (e.g., goes to 155°F on a 5 psi pressure drop), consider increasing outer loop gain a bit, or increasing feedforward gain. If vent temp undershoots (goes below 151, indicating perhaps over-cooling), reduce outer gain or feedforward.
Check the system at different operating points if possible: e.g., low power (60 psi) and high power (25 psi). Verify the control handles both. At higher cooling water pressure loads (toward 25 psi), the feedforward will be at its maximum bias. Ensure the vent still holds ~153°F. If at the extremes the vent can’t be held (e.g., at 25 psi vent creeps to 158°F with valve 100% open), that indicates the cooling system is at capacity. In that case, consider if it’s acceptable (158 is slight) or if you need to expand capacity. The control can only do so much within physical limits.
Monitor supporting variables: If cooling tower pressure drops or water gets very warm on a hot day, see if the control still maintains vent temp. If you notice a bias, fine-tune the compensation terms:
E.g., on a very hot day (water 85°F), vent tends to run at 155–156°F instead of 153. You might increase TIT52001_bias range a bit to add more valve. Conversely, on a cold day (water 60°F), if vent tends to dip to 145–148, reduce that compensation.
If tower pressure falls (maybe multiple processes using water), and vent rises, tweak PIT52006.bias. These can often be adjusted during operation since they are feedforward terms (minor changes won’t destabilize feedback loops).
Validate methanol venting qualitatively: The whole point of 151–155°F vent is to allow methanol (boiling ~148°F) to remain vapor and vent to atmosphere. You may confirm that the distillate (from LWC) has reduced methanol content and that the vented gases (if analyzed) contain the methanol. If there is a lab test or sensor for composition, use it. This is a process verification beyond control, but it’s good to confirm that the chosen setpoint indeed achieves the separation intended.
Finally, update the documentation: Record the final PIDE tuning parameters, feedforward formula, and any special logic (pressure/temp compensation) in the control narrative or PLC program comments. Train operators on how the cascaded loops function, including how to put them in manual if needed. Make sure alarms are in place for abnormal situations (e.g., “Vent Temperature Deviation High” if out of band for too long, or “Cooling Water Valve Saturated” if valve at 100% for X seconds, to alert that we are at control limit).
By following these steps, the cascaded feedforward control loop will be deployed in a controlled, safe manner. The result should be a robust control system that keeps the vent temperature tightly in the 151–153 °F range, automatically compensating for changes in vapor load and cooling water conditions. This ensures methanol-rich vapors are vented while valuable ethanol is condensed, optimizing both safety and efficiency of the distillation process.


[TABLE 1]
Test & Variable | Initial Value | New Value (Step) | Dead Time (Td) | Time Constant (τ) | Process Gain (ΔPV/ΔCV) | Observations
Inner Loop (TIT-4033) step (e.g. valve %)**:**** | Valve 30% to 40% (example) | TIT-4033: 120°F to ?? | ~(sec) | ~(sec) | (°F/% valve) | e.g. temp dipped then stabilized; no overshoot observed.
Outer Loop (TIT-4031) step via SP: | Prod SP 130°F to 135°F | TIT-4031: 152→? | ~(sec) | ~(sec) | (°F/°F SP) | e.g. vent temp rose slowly by X°F.
Disturbance (Pressure): | PIT-4012: 1.0→1.5 psi | TIT-4031: 152→158°F | ~(sec) | ~(sec) | (°F/psi) or (% valve/psi) | e.g. vent temp increased 6°F with no control action.